Index usage docs (#21229)
MaterializeInc/materialize: doc/user/content/transform-data/optimization.md

     ReadExistingIndex materialize.public.foo_x_y lookup_value=(42, "hello")+
                                                                            +
 Used Indexes:                                                              +
   - materialize.public.foo_x_y (lookup)                                    +
```

#### Matching multi-column indexes to multi-column `WHERE` clauses

In general, your index key should exactly match the columns that are constrained in the `WHERE` clause. In more detail:

> - **_If the `WHERE` clause constrains fewer fields than your index key includes, then the index will not be used_** for a lookup, but will be fully scanned. For example, an index on `(x, y)` cannot be used to execute `WHERE x = 7` as a point lookup.

Reviewer: nit: you are doing an emphasis in a combination of bold and italic, which in general is an anti-pattern. cc @parkerhendo for your opinion as the expert on fonts and layouts.

Also, I suggest to highlight either the entire sentence or only this bit:

> If the `WHERE` clause constrains fewer fields than your index key includes, [...]

Reviewer: Other documents use the

```text
{{< warning >}}
Some highlighted text
{{< warning >}}
```

convention to highlight important information, but let's see what @morsapaes has to say about this.

Author: Thanks, I changed it to `{{< warning >}}` for now. Let's see what @morsapaes will say.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure if we have an existing style guide or rules for this, but I'd lean on **bolding** words or phrases you want to emphasize. I'd personally recommend against emphasizing entire sentences, but that's totally subjective, so feel free to ignore.

Author: Thanks! I ended up doing it with `{{< warning >}}`.

- If the `WHERE` clause constrains more fields than your index key includes, then the index might still provide some speedup, but it won't necessarily be optimal: In this case, the index lookup is performed using only those constraints that are included in the index key, and the rest of the constraints will be used to subsequently filter the result of the index lookup.
- If `OR` is used and not all arguments constrain the same fields, create an index for the intersection of the constrained fields. For example, if you have `WHERE (x = 51 AND y = 'bbb') OR (x = 76 AND z = 9)`, create an index just on `x`.
- If `OR` is used and its arguments constrain completely disjoint sets of fields (e.g. `WHERE x = 5 OR y = 'aaa'`), try to rewrite your query using a `UNION` (or `UNION ALL`), where each argument of the `UNION` has one of the original `OR` arguments.

### `JOIN`

> In general, you can improve the performance of your joins by creating indexes on the columns occurring in join keys. This comes at the cost of additional memory usage. Fortunately, Materialize's in-memory [arrangements](/overview/arrangements) (the internal data structure of indexes) allow the system to share indexes across queries, which means **for multiple queries, an index is a fixed upfront cost with memory savings for each new query that uses it.**

Reviewer: nit: you can reference the joins blog post here.

Reviewer: Other documents use the

```text
{{< warning >}}
Some highlighted text
{{< warning >}}
```

convention to highlight important information, but let's see what @morsapaes has to say about this.

Author: Done

     ReadExistingIndex materialize.public.foo_x_y lookup_value=(42, "hello")+
                                                                            +
 Used Indexes:                                                              +
   - materialize.public.foo_x_y (lookup)                                    +
```

#### Matching multi-column indexes to multi-column `WHERE` clauses

In general, your index key should exactly match the columns that are constrained in the `WHERE` clause. In more detail:

> - {{< warning >}} If the `WHERE` clause constrains fewer fields than your index key includes, then the index will not be used for a lookup, but will be fully scanned. For example, an index on `(x, y)` cannot be used to execute `WHERE x = 7` as a point lookup. {{< /warning >}}

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  {{< warning >}} If the `WHERE` clause constrains fewer fields than your index key includes, then the index will not be used for a lookup, but will be fully scanned. For example, an index on `(x, y)` cannot be used to execute `WHERE x = 7` as a point lookup. {{< /warning >}}
```

Author: changed

If your query filters one or more of the join inputs by a literal equality (e.g., `WHERE t.name = 'Escalante'`), place one of those input collections first in the `FROM` clause. In particular, this can speed up [ad hoc `SELECT` queries](/sql/select/#ad-hoc-queries) by accessing collections using index lookups rather than full scans.

> Note that when the same input is being used in a join as well as being constrained by equalities to literals, _either_ the join _or_ the literal equalities can be sped up by an index (possibly the same index, but usually different indexes). Which of these will perform better depends on data characteristics. For example, the following query can make use of _either_ of the following two indexes, but not both at the same time:

Author: @aalexandrov, could you please check this?

Reviewer: Looks good!

> - on `teachers(name)` to perform a point lookup before the join,

Author: changed

If your query filters one or more of the join inputs by a literal equality (e.g., `WHERE t.name = 'Escalante'`), place one of those input collections first in the `FROM` clause. In particular, this can speed up [ad hoc `SELECT` queries](/sql/select/#ad-hoc-queries) by accessing collections using index lookups rather than full scans.

Note that when the same input is being used in a join as well as being constrained by equalities to literals, _either_ the join _or_ the literal equalities can be sped up by an index (possibly the same index, but usually different indexes). Which of these will perform better depends on data characteristics. For example, the following query can make use of _either_ of the following two indexes, but not both at the same time:
- on `teachers(name)` to perform the `t.name = 'Escalante'` point lookup before the join,
- on `teachers(id)` to speed up the join and then perform the `WHERE t.name = 'Escalante'`.

```sql
SELECT
    t.name,
    s.schedule,
    s.course_id
FROM teachers t
INNER JOIN sections s ON t.id = s.teacher_id
WHERE t.name = 'Escalante';
```

> In this case, the index on `teachers(name)` will probably work better, as the `WHERE t.name = 'Escalante'` will probably filter out a very large percentage of the `teachers` table before the table is fed to the join. You can see an example `EXPLAIN` command output for the above query [here](#use-explain-to-verify-index-usage).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In this case, the index on `teachers(name)` might work better, as the `WHERE t.name = 'Escalante'` can filter out a very large percentage of the `teachers` table before the table is fed to the join. You can see an example `EXPLAIN` command output for the above query [here](#use-explain-to-verify-index-usage).
```

    INNER JOIN courses c ON s_c.course_id = c.id;
    ```

> ### Default Index

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Default index
```

     Filter (#0) IS NOT NULL AND (#5) IS NOT NULL                                  +
       Join on=(#0 = #4 AND #5 = #7) type=delta                                    +
         ArrangeBy keys=[[#0]]                                                     +
           ReadExistingIndex materialize.public.teachers lookup_value=("Escalante")+
         ArrangeBy keys=[[#1], [#2]]                                               +
           Get materialize.public.sections                                         +
         ArrangeBy keys=[[#0]]                                                     +
           Get materialize.public.courses                                          +
                                                                                   +
 Used Indexes:                                                                     +
   - materialize.public.teachers_name (lookup)                                     +
   - materialize.public.sections_fk_teachers (delta join lookup)                   +
   - materialize.public.pk_courses (delta join lookup)                             +
   - materialize.public.sections_fk_courses (delta join lookup)                    +
```

> We can see in the above `EXPLAIN` printout that the system will use `teachers_name` for a point lookup, and use three other indexes for the execution of the delta join. Note that the `pk_teachers` index is not used, as explained [above](#joins-with-filters).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can see in the above `EXPLAIN` printout that the system will use `teachers_name` for a point lookup, and use three other indexes for the execution of the delta join. Note that the `pk_teachers` index is not used, as explained [above](#joins-with-filters).
```

> The following are the possible index usage types:
> - `*** full scan ***`: We will read the entire index.
> - `lookup`: We will look up only specific keys in the index.
> - `differential join`: We will use the index to perform a so-called _differential join_. For a differential join _between two relations_, the amount of memory required is proportional to the sum of the sizes of each of the input relations _that are not indexed_. In other words, if an input is already indexed, then the size of that input won't affect the memory usage of a differential join between two relations. For a join between more than two relations, we recommend aiming for a delta join instead of a differential join, as explained [above](#optimize-multi-way-joins-with-delta-joins). This is because a differential join between more than two relations will perform a series of binary differential joins on top of each other. Each of these binary joins except the first one will use memory proportional to the size of the intermediate data that is fed into the join.
> - `delta join 1st input (full scan)`: We will use the index for the first input of a [delta join](#optimize-multi-way-joins-with-delta-joins). Note that the first input of a delta join is always fully scanned. However, executing the join won't require additional memory if the input is indexed.
> - `delta join lookup`: We will use the index for a non-first input of a [delta join](#optimize-multi-way-joins-with-delta-joins). This means that in an ad hoc query, the join will perform only lookups into the index.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The following are the possible index usage types:
- `*** full scan ***`: Materialize will read the entire index.
- `lookup`: Materialize will look up only specific keys in the index.
- `differential join`: Materialize will use the index to perform a _differential join_. For a differential join between two relations, the amount of memory required is proportional to the sum of the sizes of each of the input relations that are **not** indexed. In other words, if an input is already indexed, then the size of that input won't affect the memory usage of a differential join between two relations. For a join between more than two relations, we recommend aiming for a delta join instead of a differential join, as explained [above](#optimize-multi-way-joins-with-delta-joins). A differential join between more than two relations will perform a series of binary differential joins on top of each other, and wach of these binary joins (except the first one) will use memory proportional to the size of the intermediate data that is fed into the join.
- `delta join 1st input (full scan)`: Materialize will use the index for the first input of a [delta join](#optimize-multi-way-joins-with-delta-joins). Note that the first input of a delta join is always fully scanned. However, executing the join won't require additional memory if the input is indexed.
- `delta join lookup`: Materialize will use the index for a non-first input of a [delta join](#optimize-multi-way-joins-with-delta-joins). This means that, in an ad hoc query, the join will perform only lookups into the index.
```
